
Reynoutria japonica (Japanese knotweed) is a problematic invasive plant found in many areas of Europe and North America. Notably, in the UK, the species can cause issues with mortgage acquisition. Control of R. japonica is complicated by its ability to regenerate from small fragments of plant material; however, there remains uncertainty about how much (in terms of mass) rhizome is required for successful regeneration. This study investigated the ability of crowns and rhizomes with different numbers of nodes to regenerate successfully from three sites in the north of England, UK. Two of the sites had been subject to herbicide treatment for two years prior to sampling and the third site had no history of herbicide treatment. No significant differences were observed in regenerated stem diameter, maximum height of stem and maximum growth increments among crowns. All traits measured from the planted crowns were significantly greater than those of the planted rhizome fragments and at least one node was necessary for successful regeneration of rhizomes. The smallest initial fragment weight to regenerate and survive the experiment was 0.5 g. Subjecting all plant material to desiccation for 38 days resulted in no regrowth (emergence or regeneration) after replanting. These findings suggest that desiccation could be a valuable management strategy for small to medium scale infestations common in urban settings.

Introduction
Reynoutria japonica (formally Fallopia japonica and commonly called Japanese knotweed) is an herbaceous perennial of the Polygonaceae family and native to East Asia, including China, Japan and Korea. It has large, shield-shaped leaves, large crowns and produces dense canes (Fig. 1). It is recognised as one of the most problematic non-native invasive species globally (Lowe et al., 2000; Pyšek et al., 2003; Duquette et al., 2015; Gillies, Clements & Grenz, 2016; Jones et al., 2018). Its ability to regenerate and spread through vegetative growth and fragmentation (Child & Wade, 2000) makes it a difficult invasive species to manage notwithstanding its lack of viable seeds in the UK, Ireland and elsewhere (Bailey, Bímová & Mandák, 2009; Engler, Abt & Buhk, 2011). Some studies also suggest that increasing global temperatures may support the spread of hybrids that do set seed (e.g., Groenevld, ois Belzile & Lavoie, 2014; Buhk & Thielsch, 2015), which is likely to increase the difficulties of controlling this species. R. japonica is often found on road verges and alongside railways (Beerling, Bailey & Conolly, 1994; Palmer, 1994; Child & Wade, 2000; Fennell, Wade & Bacon, 2018) but primarily invades disturbed ecosystems, such as riparian zones, resulting in increased flood risk (Booy, Wade & Roy, 2015), significant biodiversity alterations (Gerber et al., 2008; Aguilera et al., 2010; Gillies, Clements & Grenz, 2016) and other impacts.

Figure 1. Examples of R. japonica material used in this study.
Figure 1

Open in a new tab
(A) Example leaves from each site: (i) Burnley, (ii) Rodley, Leeds, (iii) Huddersfield; (B) rhizome network with examples of (i) dark woody rhizome; (ii) immature rhizome; (iii) pink buds; (iv) immature fleshy rhizome; (v) thin root; (C) example of lab-grown stems from field-collected crown; (D) examples of lab-grown stems beginning to emerge from field-collected rhizome fragments; (E) examples of field-collected plant fragment categories: (i) crown; (ii) rhizome fragment with two nodes; (iii) rhizome fragment with one node (iv); rhizome fragment with zero nodes; black bar = one cm.

Various management options are available for control of Japanese knotweed, from avoidance to excavation, with herbicide treatment being the optimal option under most scenarios (Environment Agency, 2016). Herbicide causes the least damage to the surrounding environment, reduces the risk of accidental spread (Beerling, 1990; Hagen & Dunwiddie, 2008; Hagner et al., 2019) and costs considerably less than excavation. Biological control, despite some promising trials (e.g., Fung et al., 2020) is not currently an available option. Jones et al. (2018) evaluated the use of phenologically-timed herbicide application for the control of R. japonica and highlighted that late season treatments with a glyphosate-based herbicide produce the best outcomes. However, following herbicide treatment there is a risk of regrowth, especially if the ground is disturbed and dormant, viable rhizomes are brought to the surface. As such, research into cost effective control methods that could reduce the potential for regrowth is needed.

In the UK, R. japonica spreads primarily through the regenerative growth of crowns and rhizomes. The rhizome network is particularly important because there is considerable plasticity in the root:shoot ratio depending on available nutrients (Hirose, 1987). The rhizomes are known to twist and turn more than many other species (Smith et al., 2007) and to grow through even small spaces. However, despite the reputation that rhizomes are associated with major structural damage, there is no evidence that they are any more damaging to built structures than other plants (Fennell, Wade & Bacon, 2018). The importance of R. japonica rhizomes for reproduction and spread can be highlighted by observations that only small fragments of rhizome are required for regeneration (Brock & Wade, 1992; Beerling, Bailey & Conolly, 1994; Francis, Riley & Hoggart, 2008); however, there is uncertainty in the literature regarding the minimum size of rhizome fragment that can regenerate successfully. Brock & Wade (1992) observed regeneration in fragments as small as 0.7 grams, and this figure has gained sustained traction throughout the literature (e.g., Bailey, Bímová & Mandák, 2009). Other work has demonstrated a dependence of regeneration on rhizome length (Sásik & Pavol Jr, 2006) and Francis, Riley & Hoggart (2008) suggested that, for regeneration from stems, the number of nodes may be the most significant determinant. Overall, there is insufficient evidence to make conclusive statements on the relevant metric (rhizome weight, length or number of nodes) required for successful regeneration of rhizomes.

Stems, as well as rhizomes, are an organ of R. japonica that increase its invasive capabilities (Brock et al., 1995). With new stands growing each year and dead stems remaining upright over winter (Fig. 1) due to slow decay rates (Vrchotová et al., 2005), stem density (from both dead and alive stems) can achieve densities of 70 stems per m−2 (Callaghan, Scott & Whittaker, 1981), which increases the competitive advantage of R. japonica by utilising space, sunlight and resources (Townsend, 1997). Although this will vary due to environmental conditions and crown size, it is apparent that the combination of underground biomass (e.g., rhizome) behaviour and aboveground biomass structure (and density) facilitates R. japonica to outcompete native shrubs and woody perennials.

Management of R. japonica infested sites is complicated by the plant being classified as controlled waste in UK and Ireland when it is taken off a site, making disposing of it expensive. One aspect of potential management that has not been fully considered is desiccation. Although many plants are drought tolerant, far fewer are known to be fully desiccation tolerant. Drought tolerance usually means that plants are able to dry out to around 23% of their fresh weight with no bulk water present in their cytoplasm but desiccation tolerance refers to even further dehydration that —once rehydrated —does not damage the plant cells (Hoekstra, Golovina & Buitink, 2001). This anhydrobiosis is often an adaptation to severe environmental conditions. For example, the desert plant Selaginella lepidophylla commonly called the “resurrection plant” is known to be able to survive almost total desiccation. Although many mosses are desiccation tolerant, far fewer angiosperms and no gymnosperms are known to be able to survive desiccation (Alpert, 2005). Drying angiosperms to equilibrium with air (dry weight) kills virtually all of them (Alpert, 2006). Desiccation as a management technique for aquatic invasive non-native species has highlighted that such species can survive even significant drying (Coughlan et al., 2018), while terrestrial plants have been shown to be more susceptible to desiccation as a potential control method (e.g., Rumex species; Alshallash & Hatcher, 2020). However, no experiments focusing on how R. japonica responds to a period of air drying and replanting were identified in the literature.

This study assesses the following: (1) the regeneration of different sizes of R. japonica fragment both exposed and unexposed to herbicide treatment; (2) the effects of nodes on rhizome fragment regeneration; and (3) the effect of desiccation by air drying on rhizome fragment regeneration.

Methods
Fieldwork
Three sites in the North of England, United Kingdom (Fig. 2), two with two years of herbicide treatment and one with no recorded treatment history, were sampled in early April 2019 near the start of the growing season, which avoided concerns about winter dormancy impacting results. Both treated sites (Burnley in Lancashire and Rodley, Leeds in West Yorkshire) were located by the side of the Leeds–Liverpool Canal, surrounded by a riparian habitat, with similar treatment histories (two years of glyphosate-based herbicide treatment applied in October 2017 and 2018). Both are managed by the Canal and Rivers Trust. The untreated site, Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, was similar though on an “island” in the Colne River, with slightly sandier soil and managed by the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust. Collection of plant material was undertaken between 1st and 4th April 2019. Ten crowns and three sections of rhizome per crown were excavated from each site using spade, trowel and hand (to gently remove the ends of the more delicate rhizomes). Crowns were selected randomly once they had at least one live cane emerging (current year’s growth) and one dead cane (showing that the rhizome had produced viable above-ground material in a previous year. Rhizomes were separated from the crowns at the point where they emerge from the crown. Once excavated, crowns and rhizomes were sealed in plastic bags and transported to the lab. Permission to sample was obtained in advance by the Canal and Rivers Trust and the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust respectively.

Figure 2. Field site locations in the United Kingdom.
Figure 2

Open in a new tab
(A) Location of field sites in the UK; (B) close-up on the North of England locations of the sites (underlying DEM is the MERIT DEM (http://hydro.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ yamadai/MERIT_DEM/) and waterways are in blue (https://mapcruzin.com/free-england-arcgis-maps-shapefiles.htm)) (C) Burnley field site; (D) Huddersfield field site; (E) Rodley, Leeds field site.

Laboratory work
Once in the lab, crowns were fresh weighted and potted. Crowns varied in size as described in Supplemental Information. Plant fragments were potted in pots of an appropriate size based on fragment size. Rhizome fragments were potted in square sided pots of nine cm per side and crowns were potted in either medium-sized pots of 21 cm diameter or large-sized pots for crowns over 900 g fresh weight (five per site; Supplemental Information) of 30 cm diameter). Crowns were potted at surface level and rhizomes were covered with soil to a depth of approximately one cm. Plants were potted the day after collection and drying was prevented by storage overnight in a cold room. Since the composition of soil biota is a potential variable that could affect R. japonica growth (Parepa, Schaffner & Bossdorf, 2013), the soil mixture was standardised throughout the experiments, consisting of multi-purpose compost (John Innes Multi-Purpose compost) mixed with garden soil at a ratio of 1:4. The garden soil was sampled from an area in Wakefield, Leeds, that is known to not contain R. japonica and is a silty clay loam, similar to the sites where the samples were collected.

For the rhizome investigation, three segments of rhizome from each crown were collected, yielding a total of 30 segments from each site. One fragment with two nodes, one fragment with one node and one fragment with no nodes were sub-sampled from each rhizome segment resulting in three subsamples of each node classification from each crown, to reduce the possibility of one unhealthy rhizome distorting results. This resulted in the potting of 30 full crowns and 270 rhizome fragments in total.

All crowns and rhizomes were watered twice a week and the amount of water was normalised to the size of the pot (so that all samples received the same relative amount of water). Fertiliser (Baby Bio Original Plant Feed: standard NPK fertiliser with Nitrogen (10.6%); Phosphorus (1.9%), Potassium (1.4%) and organic matter) was added to the watering regime (10 ml per litre) on day 1, day 30 and day 50 of the 60-day experimental period to ensure the availability of nutrients throughout the experiment. Pots were randomly organised and placed on a laboratory bench by the window so that they were exposed to sunlight. They were subject to room temperature (with nightly minima above approximately 9 °C and daily maxima between 15–36 °C, with average daily temperature ranges of approximately 19–25 °C).

Both emergence (new growth) and regeneration were monitored throughout the experiment. Emergence was considered to have occurred when a new bud or stem was observed growing from the crown or rhizome fragment. Successful regeneration was considered to have occurred when a new bud emerged, burst and formed one leaf. Stem height was measured by recording the height from the surface of the soil to the tip of the stem. If stems did not show the traits mentioned, they were classed as an emergence but not regeneration.

Once the growth phase of the experiment ended (after 60 days), all underground biomass was left on plastic sheets to dry in the lab, which was generally between 19 and 25 °C during the day and around 9 °C minimum at night. Plant fragments were weighed at least once per week and this drying process continued until 10% or less of mass was lost between measurements and lasted for 38 days (by which time all plant fragments met these criteria including even the largest crowns (see Supplemental Information). The dried biomass was replanted under the same conditions as the first pot experiment and observed for an additional 60 day period. Treatment of the planted dry biomass replicated the initial 60 day growth experiment with fertiliser (Baby Bio) applied on day 1, 30 and 50 and water applied twice per week.

All field and laboratory work and the disposal of material at the end of the experiment followed strict biosecurity protocols in line with the University of Leeds health and safety standards.

Statistical analysis
Anderson-Darling normality tests were completed prior to any test for differences in regeneration and growth rates between six categories (ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis testing). Subsequent post hoc tests included Fisher’s pairwise comparison, Mann–Whitney U test or T-test depending on their distributions. A range of statistical software packages were used to obtain the results including R, Minitab (version 18) and GPower (Faul et al., 2009; GPower 3.1.9.4). ImageJ (2019, v1.51c: documentation and downloads at website http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA) was used to measure leaf area. All raw data are provided in the Supplemental Information.

Results
Emergence and regeneration
The experiment ran for 60 days with 88.5% (293/331 stems) of stems emerging within the first 30 days (Fig. 3) and an additional 10 emerging during the final four days of the experiment. A total of 38 stems (11.48% of all regenerations) emerged between day 31 and day 60 (Fig. 3; Table 1), highlighting that 30 days in not long enough to track emergence (or regeneration) of R. japonica. All three sites had emergences during this period from both crowns and rhizomes.

Figure 3. Frequency of new stem emergence per day of the 60-day experiment across all the categories of plant material.
Figure 3

Open in a new tab
Colours refer to sites (Burnley in blue; Rodley in red and Huddersfield in yellow) and colour tones refer to size of plant material (darkest shades for full crown, medium shades for two node rhizome fragments and lightest tone for one node rhizome fragments). Full, full crown; number, number of nodes (1 or 2); BR, Burnley; RR, Rodley; HR, Huddersfield. The dashed line shows day 30.

Table 1. Regenerative success of all sites and size categories.
Percentages rounded to nearest 0.1%.

 	NS/N	Success rate (%)
Burnley Full	10/10	100%
Burnley Rh 2	20/30	66.7%
Burnley Rh 1	16/30	53.3%
Burnley Rh 0	0/30	0%
Rodley Full	8/10	80%
Rodley Rh 2	23/30	76.7%
Rodley Rh 1	24/30	80%
Rodley Rh 0	0/30	0%
Huddersfield Full	10/10	100%
Huddersfield Rh 2	25/30	83.3%
Huddersfield Rh 1	18/30	60%
Huddersfield Rh 0	0/30	0%
Open in a new tab
Notes.

Full
full crowns
Rh
rhizomes
number
number of nodes
NS
number of rhizome fragments successfully regenerated from N, total number of samples
Day 16 had the most new emergences with 57 new buds emerging above the surface of the soil. Figure 3 shows that emergences from rhizomes experience a longer lag time compared to full crowns with the first crown emergences occurring on day 3 and the first rhizome emergences occurring on day 7.

Successful regeneration occurred in both crowns and rhizomes with one or two nodes. No emergence (or regeneration) was recorded from any rhizome fragment with zero nodes, regardless of fragment weight or length. Table 1 shows that full crowns exhibited the highest success rate with the only failed regenerations occurring in Rodley (20% (two crowns) failed to regenerate) and that with the increasing size categories (zero to one to two nodes to full crowns) there was an increase in successful regeneration.

Growth
Most of the substantial increase in height was observed in the first three weeks, with maximum growth usually occurring in weeks 2–4 (Fig. 4), for all plant fragment types but maximum growth was recorded for two Rodley one-node fragments and two Huddersfield crowns in week 5 and for one Rodley one-node fragment in week 6 (Supplemental Information). Thereafter, growth decreased or ceased towards the latter half of the study period. The highest weekly growth increment was 111.8 cm per week (Supplemental Information), by a Huddersfield full crown in its second week of growth. The minimum growth rate recorded was 0 cm for at least one plant fragment of each type .There was no significant difference between crowns (Kruskal-Wallis: p = 0.262, H = 2.68; Figs. 4B(i) and Figs. 4C(i)) or one node fragments (p = 0.206, F = 1.7; Figs. 4B(iii) and 4C(iii)) across 
